---
published: false
layout: post
title: The biomass energy
category: biomass
tags:
  - biomass
---
## Overview


Energy from biomass can be a major source of energy.

How much electricity can biomass power plants provide?



What is considerd as first generation biomass/biofuel?


Corn
Wheat
Sugarcane



What is considered as second generation biomass/biofuel?

Sawdust
Tree logs.
Switchgrass
Forrest residue



Straw


##### Third Generation: Algae

First and second generation biomass is now widely used in the world to produce heat, electricity and bio fuels. In the lecture you have heared that especially first generation bio fuels have some serious downsides. The production of bio fuels from algae has been studied for several decades and recently the first commercial production plants have been opened. The main advantages of algae are the higher photosynthetic efficiency and that they can produced on non arable land. In this exercise we will make another back of the envelope calculation to get a surface power density of this type of biofuel. Afterwards you can compare it with other bio fuels.

Let's consider a future production facility with 40500 m2 of algae reactors. The algae get harvested form the tubes in the reactors every 10 days. Furthermore the facility has the following (very high chosen) properties:

Solar radiation: 1800  kWh/m2/year  
Photosynthetic efficiency: 4%
Oil content in produced algae: 50%
We do not assume a further conversion efficiency.
We assume all Solar irradiation gets absorbed by the algae in the reactors.

What is the power potential of this fuel from algae production example expressed in Watt per square meter of reactor?

Average solar power potential : 1800 (Kwh/year/m^2) / (24*365) (hours/year) = 205.5 W/m^2
Achieved power density: 205.5 (W/m^2) * 0.04 * 0.50 = 4.11 W/m^2

We assume that the produced fuel has the following properties:

Density: 800 kg/m3
Higher caloric value: 32 MJ/kg
For the following exercise we use

1 US Gallon = 3.785 liters
1 Acre = 4046.86 m2


An American company aims for a biofuel production of 8000 US gallons per acre of algea reactors per year. The total area of the production facility has 40 acres of bioreactors.

What is the approximate power density of this certain process? Give your answer in W/m2

Converting to SI units: 8000 (gallons/acre/year) * 3.785 (liters/gallon) / 4046.86 (m^2/acre) = 7.482 liters/m^2/year
Converting to energy: 7.482 (liters/m^2/year) * 0.8 (kg/liter) * 32 (MJ/kg) = 191.55 MJ/m^2/year
Converting to power density: 191.55 * 10^6 (J/m^2/year) / (365*24*60*60) (seconds in year) = 6.07 W/m^2















