---
published: true
layout: post
title: The nuclear energy
category: nuclear
tags:
  - nuclear
  - energy
---
## A New Post

Enter text in [Markdown](http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/). Use the toolbar above, or click the **?** button for formatting help.


#### New technology
Pressurized boiling water reactors are the traditionally used technology for nuclear power plants. Alternatives being studied include pocket nuclear plants. Which of the following is a benefit of a pocket nuclear plant?

The overall construction cost is reduced




Plants can be built in such a way with “passive safety”

Units can be manufactured in a factory environment and can be easily transported

Plants can be built containing enough fuel for their entire useful life and sealed.




#### Nuclear Energy > introduction

https://courses.edx.org/courses/course-v1:HarvardX+ENGSCI137x+2T2016/courseware/10f80845327048b38b6fe19a15aae974/ace0cfdce5ff49baab9016f4e69eab5b/

#### Energy density

As David mentioned, nuclear power is basically one heck of a way to boil water, and the steam it generates turns a turbine and generates electricity much like in a natural gas or coal plant. But as he described, the method of extracting thermal energy from the fuel is very different – rather than combusting the fuel, we rely on nuclear chain reactions. The total amount of energy extracted from a given unit of fuel is called the “burnup,” and is usually around 50 GW-days of thermal energy per ton of uranium in modern plants (this “burnup” is analogous to the heat of combustion for fossil fuels).

In terms of mass, how much more energy dense is nuclear fuel at a burnup of 50 GW-days/ton than gasoline (use gasoline's higher heating value)?

100,000 times more energy dense




What’s the cost of fuel, in $/GJ, for a nuclear plant that extracts 50 GW-days/ton of fuel, with fuel costing $2500/kg?
$.6/GJ (much less than any fossil fuel)
#### Nuclear Energy > Three views of nuclear power > Engineer's View
moderator ,    uranium 235 238  
 - pressure 150
 - degrees 315
 
 

