---
published: false
layout: post
title: The energy subsidy
category: renewable
tags:
  - subsidy
  - renewable
---
## subsidy

 [subsidy](https://cleantechnica.com/2016/12/25/cost-of-solar-power-vs-cost-of-wind-power-coal-nuclear-natural-gas/). 


Over the first 15 years of these energy sources’ subsidies, oil and gas received 5 times what renewables got (in 2010 dollars) and nuclear energy got 10 times as much. (Most of the renewable subsidies went to corn farms for ethanol, not wind, solar and other renewable electricity technologies.)

Between 1918 and 2009 oil and gas received average annual subsidies of $4.86 billion. (92 x $4.86 billion = $447 billion)

Between 1947 and 1999 nuclear received average annual subsidies of $3.50 billion. (53 x $3.50 billion = $185.6 billion)

Between 1980 and 2009 biofuel received average annual subsidies of $1.08 billion. (29 x $1.08 billion = $31 billion)

Between 1994 and 2009 wind and solar received average annual subsidies of $0.37 billion. (15 x $0.37 = $5.6 billion)

http://www.dblinvestors.com/do...

Since the 2009 cutoff above wind and solar have been receiving subsidies in larger amounts. This is because many subsides are now based on new production. (If any new nuclear had come on line it would also received PTC subsidies.)

Out of curiosity I made a rough stab at calculating the amount wind and solar have received since 2009.

Based on EIA production numbers from the beginning of 2010 through 2015 solar produced 73,560 million kWh of electricity and wind produced 895,301 million kWh.

Ignoring the fact that some wind/solar farms chose the 30% ITC rather than the $0.023/kWh PTC and doing the math as if all wind and solar chose the PTC, wind and solar subsidies would have received subsidies (had their taxes lowered) by $22.3 billion.

Between 1994 and 2009 renewables received subsidies of $5.6 billion. Adding in the 2010 to 2015 (roughly calculated) subsidies the total comes to $27.9 billion.

Remember, nuclear received $185.6 billion before 1999. 6.6x as much as wind and solar have received in total.

Of course there are subsidies for nuclear which are not included in the $185.6 billion.

Here's another interesting statistic.

In 2013 nuclear produced 19.4% of all US electricity. Wind and solar produced 4.33%.

Nuclear had received 7.4x as much subsidy up to that point in time and yet produced only 4.5x as much electricity. We received 1.6x more electricity per dollar subsidy with wind and solar.

Another indication that we seem to have wasted our money on nuclear.

And let's not forget the $140 billion to $242 billion taxpayers spend each year treating health problems caused by coal. That subsidy totally dwarfs everything.

And so often overlooked is the calculated value of taxpayer assumed liability for nuclear reactor disaster which runs $2.2 billion dollars per year per reactor. Roughly $200 billion per year to cover the current 99 reactors.
